# Unravel the landscape and pulses of cycling activities from a dockless bike-sharing system

## Introduction

In the past few decades, with increasing concerns over global warming and rapid urbanization, numerous efforts have been devoted in cities to advance public bike sharing as a viable and green mobility solution. Bike-sharing systems allow citizens' short-term access to bicycles, when needed, without bearing the cost and responsibilities of bike ownership. The successful implementation of bike-sharing systems could provide alternative solutions to many urban issues, such as traffic congestion, air pollution, energy deficiency, and deterioration ofhuman health (DeMaio, 2009; Jäppinen, Toivonen, & Salonen, 2013; W. H. Organization, 2002).

Since 1965, bike-sharing systems have evolved through several key phases. The first bike-sharing program, the White Bikes, was initiated in Amsterdam as dockless and free (DeMaio, 2009; Shaheen, Guzman, & Zhang, 2010). However, its implementation sustained for a short while due to bike theft and vandalism. In order to better manage bikes and improve service stability, later generations of bike-sharing system require users to pick up and drop off bikes at fixed locations. Such bikesharing systems with docking stations quickly spread across cities and successfully promoted cycling activities. However, the stability offered by docking stations came with limited accessibility of bikes and flexibility for users (Fishman, Washington, Haworth, & Mazzei, 2014). The deployment of bikes was also limited by the available space for docking stations, particularly in condensed cities.

The recent boom of sharing economy along with its technological underpinnings have brought new opportunities to the bike-sharing markets. Today, a new type of system that provides station-less bike rental services is expanding (iiMedia Research, 2017; Zhang, Shaheen, & Chen, 2014). Many cities nowadays are implementing this new generation system, which allows people to locate and unlock a bicycle using a smart-phone app, and then leave the bike wherever the journey ends. These new services are quickly adopted by citizens, who view them as a healthy and cost-effective mobility solution, or simply a kind of fashion.

Previous studies have mainly focused on examining the utilization of station-based systems (Froehlich, Neumann, Oliver, et al., 2009; Vogel, Greiser, & Mattfeld, 2011). Little is known, however, about the usage of this new generation bike-sharing scheme. As bicycles are unleashed from docking stations, users will have more freedom to choose where to start and end their trips. The spatiotemporal patterns of cycling activities induced by the dockless systems may be quite different from traditional ones with fixed rental stations. To date, limited studies have examined the usage of dockless bike-sharing systems in cities (Bao, He, Ruan, Li, & Zheng, 2017; Shen, Zhang, & Zhao, 2018). These studies focused more on analyzing the intensity of cycling activities and their spatial distributions. How travel demand changes over time at different locations and how these temporal signatures vary among places were not investigated.

This study aims to unravel the landscape and pulses of cycling activities from a dockless bike-sharing system. Using a four-month GPS dataset collected from a major bike-sharing operator in Singapore, we reconstruct the temporal usage patterns of shared bikes across urban locations based on millions of cycling trips extracted from the dataset. An eigendecomposition approach is then employed to uncover the hidden structures of these temporal patterns by revealing how they resemble or deviate from the base mode (average pulse) of the city. Then, several key built environment indicators are derived and correlated with bicycle usage patterns. Finally, we visualize the spatial distribution of places with distinctive temporal signatures to gain locationspecific insights.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a comprehensive review on the evolution of bike-sharing systems and relevant research. Section 3 describes the dataset and study area, followed by detailed descriptions of methodologies. Results are then presented and analyzed in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5, we conclude our study and discuss future research directions.

## 2. Literature review
### 2.1. History of bike sharing

The conventional bike-sharing programs have gone through three stages as summarized in (DeMaio, 2009; Shaheen et al., 2010). The first bike-sharing program, the White Bikes, was introduced in Amsterdam in the 1960s where all bikes were offered unlocked and free-of-charge. Its implementation sustained for a short time mainly due to bike theft and vandalism. The following coin-deposit generation in 1990s in- troduced docking stations and required users to pay a small amount of deposit before initiating trips at a particular station. Due to the anon- ymous nature of payment and the lack of tracking technology, such systems also suffered from instability of services due to bike theft, be- cause one can simply appropriate the bikes after paying for the deposit.The third generation of bike-sharing system is known as the information technology (IT) based system. The IT-based system has equipped with many new technologies such as mag-stripe cards and mobile phone access. This system quickly spread across cities around the globe and successfully promoted cycling activities (Handy, Heinen, & Krizek, 2012; Larsen, 2013; Pucher, Lanversin, Suzuki, & Whitelegg, 2012). By 2010, there are 101 bike-sharing programs worldwide with 139,300 bikes and 9,332 stations. However, its accessibility and scale of devel- opment as well as users' flexibility were constrained by the locations and sizes of docking stations (Fishman, Washington, & Haworth, 2014; Fishman, Washington, Haworth, & Mazzei, 2014). It was until recently, with the prevalence of mobile phones and mobile payment, that the invention of dockless systems fully unleashed the potential of urban bike sharing. In 2015, Ofo and Mobike, two start-up companies in China, introduced a new generation of fully dockless bike-sharing system. In this system, bikes are embedded with GPS sensors and users can locate and unlock bikes with a smartphone app and later pay for it using mobile payment. Unrestrained by the docking stations, users can reach wider destination and this system has expanded tremendously in the recent two years. By March 2017, there have been over 4 million dockless bikes deployed in China while there were only 180,000 in February 2012 (iiMedia Research, 2017; Zhang et al., 2014). This system has also spread to Hong Kong, Singapore, and cities in western countries.

### 2.2. Spatiotemporal analysis of bike sharing

Spatiotemporal analysis of bike-sharing data (stock or trip data) can provide evidence for service monitoring and optimization. Most of the docked bike-sharing studies have access only to the stock data that tracks the variation in the number of available bikes, while the trip data, which include origins and destinations, reveal more information of the service. To analyze stock data, clustering techniques are usually adopted to categorize stations that share similar behaviors. The tem- poral profile of normalized available bikes is calculated for clustering. Clustering was employed to identify three clusters in Dublin's bike- sharing system namely attractor, generator and balanced stations in (Jiménez, Nogal, Caulfield, & Pilla, 2016). Similarly, Froehlich et al. found six clusters that share similar temporal patterns of bike usage from Bicing, a bike-sharing system in Barcelona, and studied how these relate to the neighborhood and time of day (Froehlich et al., 2009). Clustering can also be used to evaluate policy changes. For example, Lathia et al. investigated the variations of clusters before and after the implementation of new user-access policy and found many stations exhibit an opposite trend after the policy change (Lathia, Ahmed, & Capra, 2012). For trip data, community detection can be employed to identify subgroups of areas that have strong intra-area connection than inter-area. It was also found to effectively reveal the spatial structures and communities of bike-sharing systems in a comparative study of five cities (Austwick, OBrien, Strano, & Viana, 2013).
Geo-visualization of the spatiotemporal patterns provides a pow- erful tool to comprehend the dynamics of bike sharing. For example, Corcoran et al. mapped the bike flows between regions in different time periods to study the impacts of weather conditions and calendar events on the cycling dynamics in Brisbane (Corcoran, Li, Rohde, Charles- Edwards, & Mateo-Babiano, 2014). They found that strong winds and rainfall reduce the number of trips significantly while the effect of temperature is limited and the calendar events induce subtle change in the spatial distribution of trips. Through visualizing trip chain as elliptic curves, Zhao et al. revealed significant variations between men and women in using public bikes, as well as between weekday and week- ends (Zhao, Wang, & Deng, 2015). Another study by Zhang et al. ex- amined the trip chains and transition activities of bike-sharing trips in Zhongshan, a city of Guangdong province in China where non-motor- ized transport took the biggest mode share and found that most users use cycling as a single transport mode for commuting (Zhang, Brussel, Thomas, & van Maarseveen, 2018). More comprehensive visualization of bike-sharing trips can be found in (Oliveira, Sotomayor, Torchelsen, Silva, & Comba, 2016). It developed an interactive visualization tool to support exploring mobility patterns of bike sharing which can help bike-sharing companies better serve the commuters.

### 2.3. Determinants of bike-sharing trips

Understanding the determinants of human travels by different transportation means (e.g., metro, bus, taxi and bicycle usage) can in- form urban planning and policy making (Tu et al., 2018; Zhang, Xu, Tu, & Ratti, 2018; Zhou et al., 2017). Previous studies have devoted con- siderable efforts into examining the usage of bike-sharing systems and its influencing factors. Demographics such as population density, median household income, and automobile ownership have been proved to impact the spatiotemporal dynamics of shared bike trips (Buck & Buehler, 2012). Many studies also demonstrated that built environment indicators such as proximity to bus and train stations, density docking stations, length of bike lanes as well as density of and proximity to points-of interests (POIs) among others are generally po- sitively correlated with cycling demand (de Chardon, Caruso, & Thomas, 2017; Wang, Lindsey, Schoner, & Harrison, 2015; Zhang, Thomas, Brussel, & Van Maarseveen, 2017). Considering the seasonal and daily variations of bicycle usage, weather is another nonnegligible factor. El-Assi et al. reported that weather conditions (e.g., humidity, temperature, precipitation and snow) in addition to demographic and built environment characteristics have remarkable influence on the demand of shared bike trips in Toronto, Canada (El-Assi, Mahmoud, & Habib, 2017). Zhao et al. found gender also an important factor when examining the duration of shared bike trips and the formation of trip chains in Nanjing, China (Zhao et al., 2015). Their study found that women are more likely to make round trips than men, especially on weekdays. Faghih-Imani and Eluru incorporated spatial and temporal effects for modelling bicycle demand of bike sharing system in New York (Faghih-Imani & Eluru, 2016). Exogenous variables such as transport network infrastructure, POIs, and temporal attributes were incorporated in their models. In short, the above studies suggest that population density, employment density, bicycle infrastructures (i.e, lanes, bike station count, station density, etc.), transportation law (e.g., liquor licenses and Helmet), and other built environment characteristics (e.g., land use mixture) are potential factors that impact the usage of bike-sharing systems.
Most of the previous studies examined the usage of shared bikes at station level mainly due to the fact that early bike-sharing systems re- lied on docking stations for fleet management and service stability. The new dockless bike-sharing system, however, released this restriction which allows bike users to initiate and terminate their trips wherever they desire. Therefore, previous studies focusing on shared bike usage at station level confront challenges as trips are no longer biased towards docking stations. Recently, Shen et al. noticed this difference and modelled the impact of fleet size, built environment characteristic and weather condition on the usage of dockless bike-sharing system in Singapore (Shen et al., 2018). They found that the usage of shared bikes increased with the expansion of the fleet size though its marginal return diminishes, and weather and built environment play important roles as well. However, limited attention was paid to the spatiotemporal dy- namics of bicycle usage. Considering the hour-to-hour variations, our study goes further to delineate the landscape and the pulses of cycling activities through eigendecomposition, thus providing a comprehensive picture of the usage patterns of shared bikes in a condensed city.